Fix #2746 and Fix part of #1723: Update Onboarding Instructions and Bazel Documentation (#5723)
oppia/oppia-android: wiki/Installing-Oppia-Android.md

## Table of Contents

- [Prepare developer environment](#prepare-developer-environment)
- [install Bazel](#install-bazel)
  - [Bazel setup for Mac](#bazel-set-up-for-mac)
  - [Bazel setup for Linux](#bazel-set-up-for-linux)
  - [Bazel setup for Windows](#bazel-set-up-for-windows)
- [Install oppia-android](#install-oppia-android)
- [Run the app from Android Studio](#run-the-app-from-android-studio)
- [Run the app from the command line](#run-the-app-from-the-command-line)
- [Set up and Run tests](#set-up-and-run-tests)
  - [Step-by-Step guidance for setting up and running app modules robolectric test](#step-by-step-guidance-for-setting-up-and-running-app-modules-robolectric-test)
  - [For tests that are in non-app modules, such as **domain** or **utility**:](#for-tests-that-are-in-non-app-modules-such-as-domain-or-utility)
- [Next Steps](#next-steps)
- [Troubleshooting Installation](#troubleshooting-installation)

## Prepare developer environment

1. Download/Install the latest version of Android Studio from [this location](https://developer.android.com/studio).

>    **Note**: We strongly recommend **Giraffe** because it has been tested and produced the best experience across different OSes.

Reviewer: Suggest flipping this:

"Download and install Android Studio Giraffe from ...
**Note**: You may try newer or older versions of Android Studio, but we can't guarantee good support."

Otherwise we're forcing the reader to make a decision they may not have the context to reasonably make. Separately, we may need to link to the archive rather than the main AS page since it can be hard to find old versions.

Author: Updated.

2. Configure your Android Studio

>    - In Android Studio, open **Tools** > **SDK Manager**.

Reviewer: These instructions should be framed before opening the project--are they still understandable in that context? Android Studio's out of box experience can be a bit confusing at times.

Author: Updated to setup the tools from the welcome screen.

>      - In the "SDK Platforms" tab (which is the default), select `API Level 29` and also `API Level 30`.

Reviewer: Should be 30 and 34 I think. Robolectric still (probably) uses 30 in Bazel, but we're targeting 34 now for production code.

Author: Done

        - If you don't see **Developer options**, you might need to enable developer mode first. Follow [these instructions](https://developer.android.com/studio/debug/dev-options#enable) to do so.
        - Connect to your device using USB.
        - Verify that your device is connected by running the `adb devices` command from your terminal.
   
      - Emulators provide the flexibility of testing the application on a variety of devices and Android API levels without needing to have each physical device.
   
     **Set up an Emulator**
      - For the best experience, you should use the emulator in Android Studio on a computer with at least the following specs:
        - 16 GB RAM
        - 64-bit Windows 10 or higher, MacOS 12 or higher, Linux, or ChromeOS operating system
        - 16 GB disk space
     
      - If you don't have these specs, the emulator might still run but not smoothly. In this case, consider testing on a physical device.

       - In Android Studio, in the right hand toolbar, locate `device Manager`.
       - Click the **+**, and then click **Create Virtual Device**.

>        - Create a phone and a tablet AVD.

Reviewer: Probably need to specify the SDK to use. Perhaps we can recommend to always install the SDK version listed above for installation?

Author: Added this information.

- Go to the bottom of the file, and enter this path: `$HOME/Library/Android/sdk`
- Hit control-x to quit.
- Enter “Y” to save the modified buffer.
- That’s it! To test it, in a new terminal window, type: `echo $PATH`

**Step 5: Verify that the build is working**

Run the following command in your terminal:

```
bazel --version
```

### Bazel Set up for Linux
This section covers Bazel installation on Ubuntu. 

Recommendations:
- use Ubuntu 18.04 (LTS), 20.04 (LTS), or 22.04 (LTS).
- use ``apt`` installation instructions.

- **Note**: if you encounter any errors related to `cURL`, please set up cURL on your machine using `sudo apt install curl`.

**Step 1: Add Bazel distribution URI as a package source**

This is a one-time setup step.

```
sudo apt install apt-transport-https curl gnupg -y
curl -fsSL https://bazel.build/bazel-release.pub.gpg | gpg --dearmor >bazel-archive-keyring.gpg
sudo mv bazel-archive-keyring.gpg /usr/share/keyrings
echo "deb [arch=amd64 signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/bazel-archive-keyring.gpg] https://storage.googleapis.com/bazel-apt stable jdk1.8" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/bazel.list
```

**Step 2: Install and update Bazel**

Run:
```shell

> sudo apt update && sudo apt install bazel-6.5.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install bazel-6.5.0
```

`apt` isn't a stable CLI API (which it likes to report :)) and this is when `apt-get` should be used.

Author: Ohh...Updated.

```

**Step 3: Set up your environment**

> Ensure that your `ANDROID_HOME` environment variable is set to the location of your Android SDK. To do this, find the path to the installed SDK using Android Studio’s SDK Manager (install SDK 28). Assuming the SDK is installed to default locations, you can use the following commands to set the `ANDROID_HOME` variable:<br>

Reviewer: Strike 'install SDK 28' here as it contradicts the installation above. We should provide instructions in one location for setting up the SDK, no need to repeat it.

Also, can the `<br>` be removed? Not sure why we need it here.

Author: Done.

```
export ANDROID_HOME=$HOME/Android/Sdk/
```

**Step 4: Verify that the build is working**

Run the following command in your terminal:

```
bazel --version
```

### Bazel Set up for Windows

> This page outlines one way to allow Bazel to be used in CLI form on Windows. Please note that **this support is currently experimental**. You may run into some problems--we suggest that you post a discussion at [github-discussions](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/discussions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page outlines one way to allow Bazel to be used in CLI form on Windows. Please note that **this support is currently experimental**. We suggest that you post a discussion at [github-discussions](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/discussions) if you run into any problems.
```

Author: Done.

Unlike Unix-based systems where Bazel runs natively without issue, the current solution on Windows is to install an Ubuntu-based subsystem. Windows currently only supports a terminal experience in this subsystem (though there is a prerelease version of the software with GUI support) which means Android Studio will not be supported. You will need to continue using the Windows version of Android Studio and only use the Linux subsystem for building & running Robolectric or JUnit-based tests.

> Due to the issues mentioned above, we recommend dual-booting your PC with Linux. However, if you choose to use windows, please follow the instructions below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to the issues mentioned above, we recommend dual-booting your PC with Linux. However, if you choose to use Windows, please follow the instructions below:
```

Author: Fixed

**Main prerequisites**:

> - Windows 10: These instructions are geared towards users of Windows 10 (older versions will not be compatible). If you're in using an older version of Windows, please follow up with a comment on [this issue](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/issues/3371).

Reviewer: @Rd4dev can we say 'Windows 11' here, instead? Windows 10 is no longer supported by MS and we should probably refer to the correct thing (assuming it actually works with the same instructions).

Ditto for the Windows 10 reference below.

Author: Updated to 10+ for now

## Table of Contents

- [Prepare developer environment](#prepare-developer-environment)

> - [install Bazel](#install-bazel)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Install Bazel](#install-bazel)
```

Author: Done.

  - [Bazel Set up for Mac](#bazel-set-up-for-mac)
  - [Bazel Set up for Linux](#bazel-set-up-for-linux)
  - [Bazel Set up for Windows](#bazel-set-up-for-windows)
- [Install oppia-android](#install-oppia-android)
- [Opening the Project in Android Studio](#opening-the-project-in-android-studio)
- [Set up and Run tests](#set-up-and-run-tests)
  - [Running app module tests](#running-app-module-tests)
  - [Running non-app module tests](#running-non-app-module-tests)
- [Next Steps](#next-steps)
- [Troubleshooting Installation](#troubleshooting-installation)

## Prepare developer environment

1. Download and install Android Studio **Giraffe** from [this location](https://developer.android.com/studio/archive).

>    **Note**: You may try newer or older versions of Android Studio, but we can't guarantee good support.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   **Note**: You may try newer or older versions of Android Studio, but we can't guarantee good support due to potential compatibility issues with different versions.
```

Reviewer 2: The original note warns about support but doesn’t explain why Giraffe is preferred. Adding this detail helps new contributors understand that Giraffe is the tested, reliable choice, reducing setup confusion and potential issues. It’s a small tweak that makes the guide more welcoming and clear for beginners.

Author: Added an explanation.

2. Configure your Android Studio
   - From your PC's application menu, open Android Studio. 
   - On the welcome screen, find the "more options menu" and select **SDK Manager**
     
     <img width="1029" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/efcc4e6e-b6ba-44fc-9c96-aa381de83911" />
    
   - In the "SDK Platforms" tab (which is the default), select `API Level 30` and also `API Level 34`.
   - Also, navigate to the "SDK Tools" tab, click the "Show Package Details" checkbox at the bottom right, then click on "Android SDK Build-Tools 34-rc1" and select 32.0.0 (this is needed for Bazel support).

   - Then, click "Apply" to download and install these two SDKs/Tools.

>      - On this screen, note the **Android SDK Location**, which is set as the ANDROID_HOME variable in  the Bazel setup step below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - On this screen, note the **Android SDK Location**, which is set as the ANDROID_HOME variable in the Bazel setup step below.
```

Spotted an extra space.

Author: Fixed.

        - Connect to your device using USB.
        - Verify that your device is connected by running the `adb devices` command from your terminal.
   
      - Emulators provide the flexibility of testing the application on a variety of devices and Android API levels without needing to have each physical device.
   
     **Set up an Emulator**
      - For the best experience, you should use the emulator in Android Studio on a computer with at least the following specs:
        - 16 GB RAM
        - 64-bit Windows 10 or higher, MacOS 12 or higher, Linux, or ChromeOS operating system
        - 16 GB disk space
     
      - If you don't have these specs, the emulator might still run but not smoothly. In this case, consider testing on a physical device.

      - On the welcome screen, find the "more options menu" and select **Virtual Device Manager**
     
        <img width="1029" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/efcc4e6e-b6ba-44fc-9c96-aa381de83911" />
         

>         * If you already have a project open in Android Studio, in the right hand toolbar, locate `device Manager`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        * If you already have a project open in Android Studio, in the right hand toolbar, locate `Device Manager`.
```

Author: Done

      - Click the **+**, and then click **Create Virtual Device**.
      - Follow the wizard to create a phone and a tablet AVD, setting the **system image** to be one of `API Level 30` or `API Level 34` as installed above.
      - After creating your devices, you will be able to see a list of all the devices on the device manager panel.
      - For more information on the different configurations available for AVDs, please visit the [official documentation page.](https://developer.android.com/studio/run/managing-avds)

## Install Bazel
### Instructions

**The steps to setting up Bazel are:**
1. Install Bazel
2. Set Bazel and ANDROID_HOME paths permanently in your terminal
3. Verify that the build is working

The expected output of `bazel --version` once Bazel set up is successful is:

```
bazel 6.5.0
```

### Bazel Set up for Mac

> It is recommended to use the binary installer steps outline below. For other ways to install Bazel on Mac, refer to the [official page](https://bazel.build/install/os-x).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is recommended to use the binary installer steps outlined below. For other ways to install Bazel on Mac, refer to the [official page](https://bazel.build/install/os-x).
```

Author: Done

```
export ANDROID_HOME=$HOME/Android/Sdk/
```

**Step 4: Verify that the build is working**

Run the following command in your terminal:

```
bazel --version
```

### Bazel Set up for Windows
This page outlines one way to allow Bazel to be used in CLI form on Windows. Please note that **this support is currently experimental**. We suggest that you post a discussion at [github-discussions](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/discussions/categories/q-a-installation) if you run into any problems.

Unlike Unix-based systems where Bazel runs natively without issue, the current solution on Windows is to install an Ubuntu-based subsystem. Windows currently only supports a terminal experience in this subsystem (though there is a prerelease version of the software with GUI support) which means Android Studio will not be supported. You will need to continue using the Windows version of Android Studio and only use the Linux subsystem for building & running Robolectric or JUnit-based tests.

> Due to the issues mentioned above, we recommend dual-booting your PC with Linux. However, if you choose to use Windows, please follow the instructions below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to the issues mentioned above, we recommend dual-booting your PC with Linux for a smoother experience (e.g., better performance and native Bazel support). If you prefer to use Windows, please follow the instructions below:
```

Author: Changes made.

**Main prerequisites**:

> - Windows 10+: These instructions are geared towards users of Windows 10+ (older versions will not be compatible). If you're in using an older version of Windows, please follow up with a comment on [this issue](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/issues/3371).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Windows 10+: These instructions are geared towards users of Windows 10+ (older versions will not be compatible). If you're using an older version of Windows, please follow up with a comment on [this issue](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/issues/3371).
```

Author: Done

## Prepare developer environment

> 1. Download/Install the latest version of Android Studio from [this location](https://developer.android.com/studio).

Reviewer 4: Would it be reasonable to recommend the latest version even after encountering the syntax highlighting issue in Ladybug AS?

Author: I've added a note to recommend Giraffe, but we are not opposed to folks testing and reporting issues with newer versions.

   - Then, click "Apply" to download and install these two SDKs/Tools.

3. Prepare a test device
   You require a physical Android device or an Android emulator to run the Oppia app. 
   - Physical devices are useful for a real-user experience feel, and testing with [accessibility tools](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/wiki/Accessibility-A11y-Guide#setting-up-accessibility-scanner-and-talkback).
   
     **Set up a physical device for development**
      - On the device, open the **Settings** app, select **Developer options**, and then **enable USB debugging** (if applicable).
        - If you don't see **Developer options**, you might need to enable developer mode first. Follow [these instructions](https://developer.android.com/studio/debug/dev-options#enable) to do so.
        - Connect to your device using USB.
        - Verify that your device is connected by running the `adb devices` command from your terminal.
   - Emulators provide the flexibility of testing the application on a variety of devices and Android API levels without needing to have each physical device.
   
     **Emulator system requirements**

>        For the best experience, you should use the emulator in Android Studio on a computer with at least the following specs:

Reviewer 4: The bullet points (if that was the intended format) below are not rendered correctly due to indentation.

Author: Fixed.

       5. Download the [google_checks.xml](https://github.com/checkstyle/checkstyle/blob/14005e371803bd52dff429904b354dc3e72638c0/src/main/resources/google_checks.xml) file. To do this, you can simply right-click on the download button at the top-right of the file.
       6. Copy this file to the directory where Git is installed (usually C:/Program Files/Git/).

## Run the app from Android Studio

1. Launch Android Studio, and on the welcome screen, select **Plugins** to install the Bazel for Android Studio plugin and restart Android Studio.

2. On next open, click the options button next to the new project/open project to find the "Import Bazel Project" option.

   <img width="1029" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/efcc4e6e-b6ba-44fc-9c96-aa381de83911" />

> 3. A setup wizard will open. For Workspace, click (**...**) to open file manager and select /opensource/oppia-android as the location since this is where we have our project's `WORKSPACE` file.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. A setup wizard will open. For Workspace, click (**...**) to open file manager and select `/opensource/oppia-android` as the location since this is where we have our project's `WORKSPACE` file.
```

Author: Done

   ![Image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9baf6f71-560b-49fe-84a7-c7b846a64287)

4. On **OK**, you will be asked to **Trust project**. Accept because we trust the project.

   <img width="1029" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bfc91f6d-d809-418d-ab20-89d899f12f72" />

5. On **next**, to Select Project View, **select Create from scratch**.

   <img width="1029" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cdc110d6-2926-4f96-b7d8-117e2c716f76" />

6. A file similar to the one below will be generated:

   <img width="760" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5a26210f-865d-4048-b5a5-73379984bfb5" />

7. In the above file, modify it so that it looks like below(copy and paste):
   
   ```
   directories:
      # Add the directories you want added as source here
      # By default, we've added your entire workspace ('.')
      .
      
   # Automatically includes all relevant targets under the 'directories' above

>    derive_targets_from_directories: true

Reviewer 4: In the [gist](https://gist.github.com/BenHenning/676113880e469727fe752c149da98e5b) by Ben, the property `derive_targets_from_directories` is set to `false`. I have also set it to `false` since we have already explicitly specified targets under the `targets` field below.  

setting it to true does not make much difference in the build but could lead to unexpected targets being indexed—just wanted to point it out for discussion.

Author: Noted and updated

Reviewer: FWIW I would actually expect there to be a rather steep time and resource penalty for using derive targets unless there's some extra simplifying happening in the plugin (or if your custom targets are very extensive) since this will pull in *all* targets (including hundreds of tests). For me, it's the difference between an ~50 minute and ~100+ minute sync.

Our Bazel setup currently supports running tests on Robolectric which is fast because it does not require a physical device or emulator setup.

### Configure Robolectric Tests

#### Step-by-Step guidance for setting up and running app module robolectric tests:

1. In Android Studio, open the test file that you wish to run. If sync completed successfully when the project was opened, there will be a green run arrow next to the class name, as well as next to each individual test name. Clicking on the arrow will run either the full class or a single test as selected.

2. Because we have set up the Bazel plugin, we can also run a test class using the run arrow at the top of the project window:

   ![Screenshot 2025-02-26 at 22 16 32](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f3be5288-dc96-4079-bcb2-b514de81f899)

   Edit configurations allows us to specify the run command:
   ![Screenshot 2025-02-26 at 22 19 34](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/462d07d2-4407-4898-bbc4-544509bd7486)

   - Test **name**, is helpful for identifying the test target from the list on the left.

>    - **Target expression** requires the fully qualified path to the test file.

Reviewer 4: Would it be better to add information on how to obtain the correct qualified path for the test after making changes to the actual test file path?

Author: I have added this above

   **Note**: Please keep the folder name as `oppia-android`. Changing the project folder name might lead to future issues with running the pre-push checks on your machine.

2. Run the `bash scripts/setup.sh` script, which adds some development tools for Oppia Android (ktlint, checkstyle, etc.). You should see a message indicating that the various tools have been downloaded.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   **Troubleshooting**: If the `setup.sh` script fails, it could be due to missing dependencies (e.g., Git or Bash) or insufficient permissions. To resolve permission issues, run `chmod +x scripts/setup.sh` to make the script executable, then try running it again. If the issue persists, ensure all required tools are installed (e.g., via `sudo apt install git` on Linux or `brew install git` on Mac) and check the terminal output for specific error messages.

```

Reviewer 2: The current text assumes the script runs perfectly, but new contributors might hit issues like permission errors or missing Git. Adding this troubleshooting note provides clear, immediate steps to fix common problems, making setup easier and less frustrating. It’s especially helpful for beginners who may not know how to debug script failures.

Author: I'm not sure about this. Git and  bash are available by default on Mac and Linux, and the windows set up steps outline how to set them both up.

I am not opposed to adding a point to the`Troubleshooting Installation` section below, once we can clarify some common causes, stacktraces and verified solutions. Do you mind openning a discussion for this?

Author: I'd like to resolve this since it is technically non-blocking. Please let us follow up in a discussion/issue.

       5. Download the [google_checks.xml](https://github.com/checkstyle/checkstyle/blob/14005e371803bd52dff429904b354dc3e72638c0/src/main/resources/google_checks.xml) file. To do this, you can simply right-click on the download button at the top-right of the file.
       6. Copy this file to the directory where Git is installed (usually C:/Program Files/Git/).

> ## Run the app from Android Studio

Reviewer: Should this be 'opening the project'?

Author: Updated to "Opening the project in Android Studio"

2. On next open, click the options button next to the new project/open project to find the "Import Bazel Project" option.

   <img width="1029" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/efcc4e6e-b6ba-44fc-9c96-aa381de83911" />

3. A setup wizard will open. For Workspace, click (**...**) to open file manager and select `/opensource/oppia-android` as the location since this is where we have our project's `WORKSPACE` file.

   ![Image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9baf6f71-560b-49fe-84a7-c7b846a64287)

4. On **OK**, you will be asked to **Trust project**. Accept because we trust the project.

   <img width="1029" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bfc91f6d-d809-418d-ab20-89d899f12f72" />

5. On **next**, to Select Project View, **select Create from scratch**.

   <img width="1029" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cdc110d6-2926-4f96-b7d8-117e2c716f76" />

6. A file similar to the one below will be generated:

   <img width="760" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5a26210f-865d-4048-b5a5-73379984bfb5" />

> 7. In the above file, modify it so that it looks like below(copy and paste):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. In the above file, modify it so that it looks like below (copy and paste):
```

Nit on spacing.

Author: Fixed

   
   ```
   directories:
      # Add the directories you want added as source here
      # By default, we've added your entire workspace ('.')
      .
      
   # Automatically includes all relevant targets under the 'directories' above
   derive_targets_from_directories: false
   
   targets:
   # If source code isn't resolving, add additional targets that compile it here
      //:oppia_dev_binary
      //app
      //app/src/main/...
      //domain/...
      //model/...
      //testing/...
      //utility/...
      //data/...

>       //scripts/...

Reviewer: Probably too extensive. Let's do:

```
      //:oppia_dev_binary
      //app
      //app/src/main/...
      //domain/src/main/...
      //testing/src/main/...
      //utility/src/main/...
      //data/src/main/...
      //model/...
```

This drops scripts and all tests for a much faster sync.

Author: Updated

      
   additional_languages:
      # Uncomment any additional languages you want supported
      # c
      # dart
      # kotlin
      java
      kotlin

   # Please uncomment an android-SDK platform. Available SDKs are:
      # android_sdk_platform: android-28

>       android_sdk_platform: android-29

Reviewer: Should be 30.

Author: Updated

      # android_sdk_platform: android-30
      # android_sdk_platform: android-31
      # android_sdk_platform: android-32
      # android_sdk_platform: android-33
      android_sdk_platform: android-34
   
   shard_sync: true
   sync_flags:
      --local_ram_resources=HOST_RAM*.5

>       --discard_analysis_cache

Reviewer: Drop this--it may be useful to bring back in the future, but I don't think it's needed with Bazel 6.x. Plus, discarding the analysis cache will really slow down even incremental syncs for less performant computers.

Author: Dropped

   
   java_language_level: 11
   ```
   **Note**: Only enable Android-SDK platforms that you have installed per the [Prepare developer environment](#prepare-developer-environment) section above. Android-SDK platforms are useful for creating emulators to test your app with.

8. Click **Create**, and allow the project to synchronize.

9. Once sync has finished, you can now build and install the app on either a virtual or physical device. Bazel supports deploying to only one device at a time, so you can connect one device, or launch one emulator at a time.

>    You can run the project by using the Bazel plugin to set up run configurations for the target that you wish to build. This performs the same action as the commands below, but using the GUI to run the app might be more intuitive for some developers.

Reviewer: FWIW we can actually save these configurations for people to use, too:

https://ij.bazel.build/docs/run-configurations.html#sharing-run-configurations

Perhaps that's worth doing and updating the project view above to import it?

Author: Should be solved when https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/issues/5761 is addressed

   ![Screenshot 2025-02-26 at 22 16 32](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f3be5288-dc96-4079-bcb2-b514de81f899)

   Edit configurations allows us to specify the run command:

   ![Image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7270b6b3-11ac-4b49-a39a-734e0437bb9e)

     - Target **Name**, is helpful for identifying the target from the list on the left.
     - **Target expression** requires a build target such as `//:oppia_dev_binary`.
     - **The Bazel command** is `mobile-install`
     - **Bazel flags** are optional.
     - Select **Apply** and then **Close** or **Ok**.

> ## Run the app from the command line

Reviewer: As mentioned in another comment, but perhaps this should go in the user guide and this updated to point to that?

In fact, I wonder if a lot of the "here's important Bazel stuff you need to do often or understand" should go in the user guide as a basis, and this page can be kept more for setting everything up.

Author: Moved to the user guide and included the link above.

We can run tests either through the UI supported by the Bazel Plugin, or via running a `bazel test` command on the terminal, i.e.:

> Tip 1: In order to get the correct path always, open the test file, then on the AS sidebar, right click on the file, and select `copy path/reference`. Then select `copy path from repository root`. Paste the copied path to terminal and remove the `.kt` extension.

   ```
   bazel test full-path-of-test-file
   ```

e.g.
   
   ```
   bazel test domain/src/test/java/org/oppia/android/domain/onboarding/AppStartupStateControllerTest
   ```

> Tip 2: You can pass a target argument to the `bazel test` command instead. Copy the relative path to the test file and query its target using `bazel query path-of-test-file` e.g. `bazel query domain/src/test/java/org/oppia/android/domain/onboarding/AppStartupStateControllerTest.kt`. This will give you a Bazel target (i.e. starts with '//') --just copy that and remove the `.kt` at the end and you can pass it to `bazel test`, e.g.

```
bazel test //domain/src/test/java/org/oppia/android/domain/onboarding:AppStartupStateControllerTest
```

> ### Configure Robolectric Tests

Reviewer: Probably also better to put in the user guide?

Author: The whole setting up tests section?

Author: I kept the basic test instructions here and moved the rest of the instructions and tips to the user guide.

#### Step-by-Step guidance for setting up and running app module robolectric tests:

1. In Android Studio, open the test file that you wish to run. If sync completed successfully when the project was opened, there will be a green run arrow next to the class name, as well as next to each individual test name. Clicking on the arrow will run either the full class or a single test as selected.

2. Because we have set up the Bazel plugin, we can also run a test class using the run arrow at the top of the project window:

   ![Screenshot 2025-02-26 at 22 16 32](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f3be5288-dc96-4079-bcb2-b514de81f899)

   Edit configurations allows us to specify the run command:
   ![Screenshot 2025-02-26 at 22 19 34](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/462d07d2-4407-4898-bbc4-544509bd7486)

   - Test **name**, is helpful for identifying the test target from the list on the left.
   - **Target expression** requires the fully qualified path to the test file.
   - **The Bazel command** for running tests is `test`
   - **Bazel flags** are optional.
   - Select **Apply** and then **Close** or **Ok**.

> #### For tests that are in non-app modules, such as **domain** or **utility**::

Reviewer: Others:
- Can right click on the tab if the test is open and copy the BUILD target.
- For all tests (including app), you can run 'bazel query' on the relative source path of the file (also copyable via right click on the file tab when the test is open) and remove the '.kt' at the end of the returned value to get the test target.

Author: These are covered under `Set up and run tests` tips above.

Author: Transferred to teh to the user guide.

   ![Image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9baf6f71-560b-49fe-84a7-c7b846a64287)

4. On **OK**, you will be asked to **Trust project**. Accept because we trust the project.

   <img width="1029" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bfc91f6d-d809-418d-ab20-89d899f12f72" />

5. On **next**, to Select Project View, **select Create from scratch**.

   <img width="1029" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cdc110d6-2926-4f96-b7d8-117e2c716f76" />

6. A file similar to the one below will be generated:

   <img width="760" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5a26210f-865d-4048-b5a5-73379984bfb5" />

7. In the above file, modify it so that it looks like below (copy and paste):
   
   ```
   directories:
      # Add the directories you want added as source here
      # By default, we've added your entire workspace ('.')
      .
      
   # Automatically includes all relevant targets under the 'directories' above
   derive_targets_from_directories: false
   
   targets:
   # If source code isn't resolving, add additional targets that compile it here
      //:oppia_dev_binary

>       //app //app/src/main/... 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      //app 
      //app/src/main/... 
```

Author: Fixed

   Edit configurations allows us to specify the run command:
   ![Screenshot 2025-02-26 at 22 19 34](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/462d07d2-4407-4898-bbc4-544509bd7486)

   - Test **name**, is helpful for identifying the test target from the list on the left.
   - **Target expression** requires the fully qualified path to the test file.
   - **The Bazel command** for running tests is `test`
   - **Bazel flags** are optional.
   - Select **Apply** and then **Close** or **Ok**.

#### For tests that are in non-app modules, such as **domain** or **utility**::

1. In Android Studio, open the test file that you wish to run. If sync completed successfully when the project was opened, there will be a green run arrow next to the class name, as well as next to each individual test name. Clicking on the arrow will run either the full class or a single test as selected.

2. A second way to run a test class would be to open the `BUILD` file located in the same package as the test file, and clicking on the green arrow next to the test target name.
  
   ![Image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c1ee9e23-b0b2-430a-9592-9f87a2fdcbf0)

> 3. The third way is to run a the test via CLI as mentioned above.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. The third way is to run the test via CLI as mentioned above.
```
We could also suggest here, the test files that are not yet modularized (i.e., test packages currently missing BUILD files) need to be executed via the CLI.

Author: Included this info, but can now be found in the user guide.

Click on the 3 dots to open the file picker. Scroll down and select `oppia-android.bazelproject`, then click **next**.

   <img width="991" alt="Screenshot 2025-03-19 at 18 45 23" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/31e0694c-a179-4adf-8d4d-28793c586ee5" />

6. The project view will be generated as follows. Click the **Create** button to complete the import.

   ![Screenshot 2025-03-19 at 18 47 57](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b7016ab8-9ae5-44e0-a624-c7cc8fc576da)

7. Immediately, the project will begin to synchronize, and will be ready once sync completes. Read more about syncing in the [Bazel User Guide](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/wiki/Bazel-User-Guide#Syncing-the-project).

   ![Screenshot 2025-03-19 at 18 49 59](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/603d85d6-1336-4893-8153-eef8caef5e81)

**Note**: Unlike Gradle, Bazel does not support the "**Android**" project view. To see all project directories, switch to the "**Project**" view instead.

In the `.aswb` directory, you will find the generated `.bazelproject` file. It should contain:

```shell
import oppia-android.bazelproject

> ```

Reviewer: Ooh, so importing a project view actually just generates the 'import' statement on its own? I want to double check this before approving since I expected that it would copy it.

Author: I tested the import, and this was the outcome.

   <img width="760" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5a26210f-865d-4048-b5a5-73379984bfb5" />

7. In the above file, modify it so that it looks like below (copy and paste):
   
```

> directories:

Reviewer: Let's replace this with an `import` statement per #5762 and specifically https://ij.bazel.build/docs/project-views.html#import. I think that will look like this:

```
import oppia-android.bazelproject
```

Author: Done. Also modified the import instructions.

- To learn about how we write tests at oppia-android, please refer to: [Oppia Android Testing](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/wiki/Oppia-Android-Testing).

- An important reference to go back to as you continue developing with Bazel is the [Bazel User Guide](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/wiki/Bazel-User-Guide).

### Troubleshooting Installation
#### General issues

> 1. If the Static Checks on your PR keeps failing, please refer to [instructions on running static checks locally](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/wiki/Static-Analysis-Checks#how-to-run-static-checks-locally) in order to catch these errors before pushing.

Reviewer 3: ‘keeps’ should be ‘keep’ to match the plural subject.
```suggestion
1. If the Static Checks on your PR keep failing, please refer to [instructions on running static checks locally](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/wiki/Static-Analysis-Checks#how-to-run-static-checks-locally) in order to catch these errors before pushing.
```

Author: Done.

- To learn about how we write tests at oppia-android, please refer to: [Oppia Android Testing](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/wiki/Oppia-Android-Testing).

> - To learn more about getting started with Bazel, please see the [Bazel User Guide](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/wiki/Bazel-User-Guide).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An important reference to go back to as you continue developing with Bazel is the [Bazel User Guide](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/wiki/Bazel-User-Guide).
```

'Getting started' sounds a bit too much like 'start here' which isn't correct--_this_ page is the actual starting place and the guide is just a long-term reference.

Author: Done.

- To learn about how we write tests at oppia-android, please refer to: [Oppia Android Testing](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/wiki/Oppia-Android-Testing).

- To learn more about getting started with Bazel, please see [Oppia-Bazel-Glossary](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/wiki/Oppia-Bazel-Glossary).

### Troubleshooting Installation
#### General issues
1. If the Static Checks on your PR keeps failing, please refer to [instructions on running static checks locally](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/wiki/Static-Analysis-Checks#how-to-run-static-checks-locally) in order to catch these errors before pushing.
2. If you are using Android Studio or another UI-based git to push, you might see unclear errors such as `Error: Failed to push some refs to git@github.com:<your_user_name>/oppia-android.git`. We recommend using the command line to run all git commands.

#### Bazel issues
The team is in the process of migrating away from Gradle to Bazel, so while the project still has Gradle build files, they are no longer maintained and cannot be used to build the project.

Please note that:

> - It's currently recommended that all team members use **Bazel** for their active development in Android Studio. While some team members use the Bazel Android Studio plugin, day-to-day Bazel development currently suffers from:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The IntelliJ Bazel plugin currently has some known issues:
```

Author: Updated

    - Significant memory overhead that continues to grow without careful pruning (i.e. periodic shutdowns of the local Bazel build server). On some Linux distros or MacOS, this can result in a Kernel panic when memory is fully exhausted.
    - Various symbolic errors throughout the codebase that can make it much more difficult to jump to specific symbols (though, unlike Gradle, all code including scripts are editable and runnable within Android Studio).
    - Syntax highlighting errors in some instances.
- As the team finishes the migration to Bazel, communications and instructions will be sent ahead of time, and we will continually update our documentation with the latest changes.

> 1. No matching toolchains (sdk_toolchain_type)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Other problems that you may run into:

1. No matching toolchains (sdk_toolchain_type)
```

(to provide some spacing between the 'please note that' and the numeration of problems).

Author: Done
